an average car has a suitcase size
engine weighing around 300 pounds a jet
engine is a couple of tonnes heavy and
several people had fit inside but the
most powerful engine out there is the
size of your fist and weighs no more
than a can of soup it's the human heart
to start our journey we need to get
inside a human body
this is Jerry we'll check out his ticker
while he's fast asleep we get inside
through Jerry's mouth
man this guy snores loud cover your ears
Jerry breathes the air in and we rush
into his lungs let's hold onto this
oxygen molecule as it hitches a ride on
a red blood cell great we've made it
into the blood yeah not much elbow room
here the walls of the tunnel will get
bigger as we move from the capillaries
onto slightly bigger venules and then
into a vein toward the heart these blood
vessels remind me of waterpark slides
only they're soft and flexible see how
they can stretch and narrow the blood
moves with every heartbeat which means
we'll get to the engine sooner or later
plus the heart is right around the
corner pack snugly in between your lungs
so I can get that oxygen-rich blood
faster and send it throughout the body
for now we're moving pretty slow about
walking pace Jerry sleeping so his
heartbeats are calm
Oh hear that it's the last snooze on
Jerry's alarm clock he glances at the
time and realizes he's late for work his
brain immediately tells his body to
release a dose of adrenaline this gets
the blood pumping faster so get ready
things are about to speed up his heart
rate increases blood pressure goes up
with his muscles full of oxygen-rich
blood he leaps out of the bed in an
instant and we zoom closer to our goal
the walls get wider and wider we're
almost there
outside of this tunnel you'd see we're
approaching a cage your precious heart
and lungs need
protection in a strong shield your ribs
we're in a main vein and whoosh welcome
to the heart the heart is essentially a
big muscle that's constantly at work it
beats 100,000 times a day close to 40
million times a year and over 2 billion
in a lifetime with each of those beats a
third of a cup of blood moves through
the heart in a day that's up to 2,000
gallons any other engine would break
down under such loads but not the
incredible human heart think of your
heart like a big food delivery center it
gets fresh supplies from the lungs we'll
call them our local farmers your red
blood cells are like delivery trucks
taking supplies throughout the city
also known as your body it gets to where
it needs to go via the roads that are
your blood cells they lead to your
organs tissues and down to the cells all
demand a constant supply of oxygen we
have a lot of oxygen because we got here
when Gerry breathed in the heart makes a
beat a valve opens like a gate and we go
from the left atrium down into the
bigger left ventricle the heart makes
one more beat and pushes the blood out
we make an exit through the huge foot
long a aorta and we're now officially
going away from the heart via the artery
highway hey don't worry we'll be back
soon enough we're rushing fast through
the body delivering this oxygen supply
to every organ muscle tissue and cell
oxygen delivery for the liver please
sign here I've got an oxygen package for
the kidneys here you go
our tunnel gets smaller and smaller as
we get off the main artery highway onto
smaller arterial Street and finally into
tiny alley like capillaries remember
them it seems Gerry's going up the
stairs so his leg muscles just ordered a
huge supply more than what they need
when he's resting the heart pumps
and the blood pressures increasing hold
on tight all the citizens of this town
get a belly full of the good stuff wipe
their mouths if they had one and hand
over carbon dioxide like you throw a
chicken bone down on your plate after
eating all the meat yep the oxygen to
carbon dioxide exchange doesn't just
happen in your lungs it's going on at
the cellular level that being said we
now have a trunk full I mean blood full
of co2 what's next well we need to get
back on the Vayne freeway toward the
heart just like we did in the lungs it
starts in the capillaries and our tunnel
gets bigger from there you might have
noticed that these roads all look the
same but any Anatomy textbook would have
you believe that veins are blue and
arteries are red nope Bloods
always red it might just be a little
brighter when it's full of oxygen and
moving through the arteries but that
blue or sometimes green hue you see
through your skin is because of the
effect of light waves shorter blue ones
are more easily reflected back to your
eye anyway all these roads 60,000 miles
of them enough to wrap around the earth
twice lead to and from one place in this
city the heart we're back but this time
we've come into the right part here we
flow through the valve and get back into
the red tunnel the artery stopped but we
can't drive through the artery without
oxygen too late we're on the way but
this time we're not rushing all over the
body we're headed to a place where we'll
finally get rid of this carbon dioxide
and restock on some fresh oxygen the
lungs
Jerry exhales goodbye co2 and takes
another breath in happy with a new
supply of oxygen we head back over to
the left part of the heart through a
vein and the journey starts over each
time you breathe this is what's
happening in your body but there's one
thing we haven't covered what powers the
powerhouse well take a drive to your
local power station and you've got your
answer electricity it's what makes the
heartbeat
check it out we'll head to a special
department and Jerry's ticker called the
sinus node up the front door has a
warning danger and a lightning bolt on
it careful don't touch anything this is
where complex chemical reactions occur
and create an electrical impulse unlike
say your leg or arm muscles all the
muscle tissue in your heart is connected
so this electrical impulse strikes the
whole heart any living tissue contracts
thanks to the electricity and the heart
is no exception
it tightens like a fist then relaxes the
impulse strikes and the heart contracts
again with each contraction blood enters
and leaves one of the four chambers and
that's how it all works
okay that was the simplified version but
you got to choose and as they say the
beat goes on
[Music]